Welcome to Slash Forward. In this episode
we’re going to go around and around while
attempting to avoid getting our minds wrapped
up. But, not in a circle, in a cube you see? As
we take a spirited jaunt through the 1997 film
Cube. Imagine waking up in a strange room with
doors on every wall. Unbeknownst to you, some of
those doors lead to adjacent rooms that contain
deadly traps. However, it’s not random, they
are identified by a complex number system. Sure,
you wouldn’t be able to figure it out, but would
one of the other survivors you happened to stumble
across along the way? Would you have the time
and wherewithal to sort things out to determine
everyone’s special talents? Would those talents
have anything to do with why each person was
selected and placed inside the device? Man, I’m
really not sure about that. But I am sure that,
along the way, we’re going to have a few laughs
and, just maybe, learn a few lessons. Be sure to
comment with your best idea for how to navigate
this labyrinthine hellscape, and hit the like
button if, in the process of pondering it, you
learn something about yourself. Let’s get to it.
We open, unsettlingly, on the closest close up of
an eyeball that’s possible with modern technology,
pulling back to reveal that it belongs to a
man. He has awoken inside an unfamiliar chamber.
Naturally curious, he spins a lever and
opens a door that leads to an adjacent
compartment. Swelling with pride over this
discovery, he does this several times,
choosing to finally enter one of them for reasons
unknown. Despite the similarities of each cube,
he remains cautious. His reluctance
was prescient as his first and only
step forward results in his body becoming
conveniently cubed for efficient storage.
We then cut to a couple more cubesters exploring
rooms and trying to make the best choices they
can. With limited information they opt to
group up and work together to avoid traps.
Before long they discover that they’re in
the party room where all roads converge,
apparently. Momentarily safe, they gather
their thoughts as Rennes sacrifices future
foot comfort for the sake of
ruling out certain pathways.
In comparing notes to try to
ascertain what the hell happened,
they realize that they all blacked out at some
point and then woke up here with no further
details about where they are or why they’re here
available to them. Quentin, a natural leader,
helps Rennes feel empowered by soliciting his
advice on how to proceed. His intent is to head
in a straight line to the end of the road, which
he will do with relative safety due to the boot.
Quentin, a cop on the outside, gives Leaven a
pep talk to get her squared away and ready as the
group begins booting their way along. She finds
some room numbers in a shaft, and hopes they’re
not sequential as that would indicate a buttload
of rooms and they only have a few days to survive
without water. To alleviate this Rennes tells
Holloway to suck a button - but in a helpful way.
Then a room with noticeable ozone
indicates the boot is not always truth
ahhhh, and the boot has no molecules, of
course! Quentin then puts together that
Rennes is the Rennes - famous professional
prison escapist. He’s been in the paper!
Anyway, he has the perfect skill set for
this type of circumstance. His first jewel
of advice - shut the f up and focus on numero
uno. If they all didn’t have boots he could use,
he would’ve already left them behind.
It’s a good thing he shared this wisdom,
because he then demonstrates the consequence of
taking things too easy when he gets blasted in
the face. And, when they see him again, he
is in extreme distress as his head has been
reformed into a little soup bowl that holds
the bubbling, foamy remains of his face.
But, if this is his fate, the pro, what of
the rest of them, they wonder? Then they
also get caught up in trying to figure
out the reason they were chosen for
whatever this is. Leaven and Worth claim to
be a couple of boring normies. And Holloway,
the doctor, criticizes Worth for being a porn
dog while Quentin puzzles over why Leaven the
student was allowed to keep her glasses. Since
there’s no such thing as a coincidence Leaven
is encouraged to put her academics to the
test and she quickly recognizes trap rooms
are marked by prime numbers. She can confirm
this because she remembers all of the prior
numbers from the rooms she’s passed through.
Yep, just a typical math student from the local
university. The boot confirms what the brain has
derived, and Leaven begins to find her voice.
Now they progress quickly, carried through by
her infallible numerology, making their way
through - but to where? They eventually take
a break for some casual chit chat at which
point Quentin shares that he has three kids I’m
sorry to hear that what is this conversation!?
Soon after they hit the end of the road - a room
with all adjacent prime numbers and only one door
unchecked. Quentin climbs up to scope it out, but
finds it already occupied by Kazan. His arrival
now requires them to move a little more slowly
to accommodate his anxiety and color preferences.
As they move through, they
ponder who the mastermind may be.
Quentin suggests some sort of rich
psychopath, but Holloway finds this
laughable. But her hubris is quickly
punished when she jumps down and chokes
on her button - great, now she has to
wait until it passes to suck it again.
With each new room blending with the last, they
get a bit too casual and Quentin finds himself
inside a razor wire contraption. He manages
to dive out with only a partial leg shave,
but they also recognize that they can no
longer trust the prime number hypothesis.
Quentin has a sneaking suspicion
that Worth knew the trap was there,
but he lets it go and when they all regroup
they take a rest so Leaven can try to work
things out. Unfortunately, this experience has
turned her from a meek churchmouse into a bossy
little knowitall who complains about everything -
like when Kazan starts peeing inside their room.
When Worth starts up again with his
nihilism, Quentin has another go at
him. He expresses his utter disdain and
suggests that, if nothing means anything,
why doesn’t he just go jump in a cube? Which,
of course, he does not. Quentin riles him up
enough to cause him to slip up and reveal that
he has some knowledge of this place. Although,
he contends that he was only contracted
to design the outer candy shell. He
knows nothing specific, because they were all
compartmentalized and only worked on one piece.
This sounds a lot like governmental
conspiracy, so Holloway gets jacked
up at the thought of being correct in her
assessment. But Worth suggests that it was
just a thing that came together with no grand
purpose and no real intention - somehow. And
that it’s being used only to demonstrate
that it’s not pointless. Their presence is
a manifestation of the out-of-control nature of
humanity, or something. If it’s any consolation,
Worth does find catharsis in the
admission and subsequent beating.
Leaven does, at least, get the outer dimensions
of the cube. After walking off their room,
she figures the whole thing’s got
twenty six cubes in any direction
She then realizes that the numbers are
Cartesian coordinates. But, if that’s true,
she started in a room that should have been
outside the cube. But at least they have a
general idea how far along they are. Although,
there is still the ever present danger of traps.
Unwilling to backtrack after coming this
far, and working out that the next room
is set off by noise, Quentin insists on
traversing it with Worth taking the lead.
They then begin the process of slowly
and quietly descending into the blue box.
Worth lucks out in that the first room he checks
passes the boot test, so they’re all lowered in.
Kazan puts it on hard mode as he comes
down on the opposite side of the room,
and then also doesn’t watch his step very well.
Luckily they are able to turn the crank to
release him. Quentin comes down last at the exact
moment that the lower door makes its final turn
on its own, but this doesn’t set off the trap.
However, when Kazan expresses his excitement,
it does give Quentin the chance to look
like a total badass for the second time.
Now that he’s all geared up, he and Holloway
have it out over the differences between
progressive ideals and authoritarianism,
resulting in a complete loss of control that
degrades his trustworthiness as a leader.
Once that nasty business is wrapped up,
Worth opens the next door to reveal
the darkness of the outer shell.
With nothing out there and nothing to hold
onto, Quentin suggests they swing around
in the dark to see if they can find a way down.
Given the weight limit of their makeshift rope,
Holloway volunteers to be the test
subject. She only gets about one box down,
and the rest of them aren’t really able to hold
her when she attempts to swing. What’s more,
when a nearby rumble shakes them,
the gang loses their grip on the
rope. Quentin manages to hold on, but when
she reaches him he gets that look in his
eyes and lets her go, which is exacerbated
by the sudden disappearance of the rope.
Now down to the four of them, they agree to take
a refreshing nap to recharge their batteries.
But basically as soon as they all hit REM
sleep, he steals Leaven to the next room
and tries to convince her that they are the
keys to getting out and the others are traps.
But his similes take on an uncomfortably
sexual air. Then the others arrive, but they
seem standoffish for some reason and no matter how
hard Quentin hits them, they don’t warm up to him.
Then he uses worthless Worth as a trap tester,
which is flippin hilarious. After all that effort,
they’ve managed to arrive back with the old
Rennester. Then they all allow themselves at
least a brief moment of coming unglued. But
then Worth gets the idea to check the room
that killed Rennes and finds an empty void.
This indicates that it’s not them circling,
but that the rumbling they’ve been hearing
are the cubes themselves changing positions.
It then dawns on Leaven that she should’ve been
using all the numbers, not just the first one.
The additional digits indicate permutations
of movement and cycles. When she remembers
the cube that seemed to have the impossible
coordinate, she posits that if they can get
back to that cube,when it returns to its original
position they will be outside the cube at large.
So Leaven gets to computing in an attempt to
solve the puzzle. After figuring their room,
she asks for numbers from all the others to use
as reference points. Based on this information,
she identifies that there are two cycles left
before they would be stuck waiting for the whole
thing to start over again. In other good news, she
now recognizes that trap rooms are identified not
by prime numbers, but by numbers that are a power
of a prime. The bad news is that she can’t compute
these astronomical numbers. But they discover
that Kazan can, so at his request Worth offers him
all the gumdrops he can cram in his piehole if he
just gets them out of there that’s not the point!
They confirm the next room is safe, but not if
it’s the correct room, but they go in anyway.
They begin moving quickly and Worth makes an
attempt to free them of the hassle of Quentin’s
volatile paranoia by dropping him into a cube.
Then they really get going until eventually,
and apparently through pure luck, they find their
original cube. Indicating, of course, that if they
had worked things out to begin with, they didn’t
have to move at all. They are waylaid when Kazan
fails to cross over in time. His screams indicate
he is not far, so Worth goes to retrieve him as
Leaven confirms their location and reveals that
the next room should take them to the bridge.
They all pile in and get yeeted into oblivion.
After the final move they transfer into what they
presume to be the bridge. Sure enough, when they
open the door, they’re greeted by the blinding
white light of heaven. But Worth isn’t feeling
so great, he’s morose and decides that there’s
not really anything out there waiting for him
to give his life meaning. This works out well
as Quentin appears and shares his new philosophy
that freedom is only for the strong, and he starts
getting stabby. But after he drops his implement
and attempts to leave, Worth catches him by the
heel and holds on just long enough for the rooms
to start back up again, converting Quentin into
a humble wall smear. Then Worth lays down and
dies as Kazan wanders off in search of gumdrops.
Cube is a very interesting and unique premise for
a horror film. And I think they did a really good
job of putting this together and making it
look so good despite the small budget. The
acting was a bit stage theater at times,
but I think the primary shortfalls of the
movie arose from the attempt to cram so
much story into the standard timeframe. It
required them to move along at a fairly high
pace and left a lot of questions in my mind.
I enjoyed the idea that they don’t know why
they’re in the cube or who was responsible
for it. I don’t think that needs to be explained.
But then, in that vein, they probably didn’t need
to spend as much time talking about it. It would
have been better to use that time to explain or
show the characters setting some establishing
rules to help bring the movie together.
For instance, they seemed to move in and out of
rooms fairly directly. They didn’t check every
door each time or really discuss what direction
they were going or why. If they set that up
at the beginning so we know it’s part of their
method, it wouldn’t need to be shown each time.
Also, in regards to the movement, it was
interesting to have different methodologies
for identifying safe and unsafe rooms. However,
the way they went about revealing those changes
made it seem like the success they had
experienced from their prior methods were
basically the result of sheer luck. If you know
the numbers mean something, why not spend more
time sorting out what they mean? Also, if they’re
meaningful, why would you ever assume that only
one of the three sequences is useful? If you’re
wrong about how the trap rooms are identified,
how the hell did you make it so far
without finding that out the hard way?
Maybe it has something to do with the
relationship between prime numbers and
factors of prime numbers that they essentially
worked the same, but I’m not mathematically
literate enough to be able to confirm that. And
they didn’t make it seem like that was the case.
In addition, it seemed odd, given the
limited time they had, that they weren’t
proceeding under a general principle to
guide them and streamline decision making.
Rennes indicated he was going in
a straight line to the end. But,
after what they sorted out later about the
size and quantity of the cubes, it seems like
it would make sense to adopt a rule like go down
every time you have the opportunity to go down.
We do learn that this wouldn’t have gotten them
out, but they didn’t know that until much later.
Aside from that, the only other real
criticism I would have comes from the
weird continuity errors they introduced
into the film. There are characters who
should have seen each other at certain
times, but didn’t. Or Quentin showing up
out of nowhere at the end - how did he find them
let alone enter the room without being noticed?
There are a few things like this throughout,
but I think these are minor gaffes overall,
because the way the story is presented is
interesting enough that some of these elements,
likely added for stylistic or dramatic
purposes, are easily overlooked.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you can
support the channel through donations or
merch. Any donation unlocks uncensored movie
reviews of Lifeforce and Under the Skin,
with others to be added over
time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.